docs/reproducibility_git/reproducibility_git_05.md, before:

## Exploring History

As we saw in the previous lesson, we can refer to commits by their
identifiers.  You can refer to the _most recent commit_ of the working
directory by using the identifier `HEAD`.

We've been adding one or two lines at a time to `transcriptome.txt`, so it's easy to track our
progress by looking, so let's do that using our `HEAD`s.  Before we start,
let's make a change to `transcriptome.txt`.

```
$ echo "Next steps: Back up our results" >> transcriptome.txt
$ cat transcriptome.txt
Step 1: Map reads with tophat
Step 2: Assemble transcripts with cufflinks
Step 3-4: Final transcriptome assembly with cuffmerge
Step 5: Compute differential expression with cuffdiff
Step 6-18: Plot expression data with cummerbund
Next steps: Back up our results
```

Now, let's see what we get.

```
$ git diff HEAD transcriptome.txt
diff --git a/transcriptome.txt b/transcriptome.txt
index c876e8d..a4a265a 100644
--- a/transcriptome.txt
+++ b/transcriptome.txt
@@ -3,3 +3,4 @@ Step 2: Assemble transcripts with cufflinks
 Step 3-4: Final transcriptome assembly with cuffmerge
 Step 5: Compute differential expression with cuffdiff
 Step 6-18: Plot expression data with cummerbund
+Next steps: Back up our results
```

Which is the same as what you would get if you leave out `HEAD` (try it).  The
real benefit in all this is when you can refer to previous commits.  We do
that by adding `~1`
(where "~" is "tilde", pronounced [**til**-d*uh*])
to refer to the commit one before `HEAD`.

```
$ git diff HEAD~1 transcriptome.txt
diff --git a/transcriptome.txt b/transcriptome.txt
index 61f7805..a4a265a 100644
--- a/transcriptome.txt
+++ b/transcriptome.txt
@@ -1,3 +1,6 @@
 Step 1: Map reads with tophat
 Step 2: Assemble transcripts with cufflinks
 Step 3-4: Final transcriptome assembly with cuffmerge
+Step 5: Compute differential expression with cuffdiff
+Step 6-18: Plot expression data with cummerbund
+Next steps: Back up our results
```

If we want to see the differences between older commits we can use `git diff`
again, but with the notation `HEAD~1`, `HEAD~2`, and so on, to refer to them:

```
$ git diff HEAD~2 transcriptome.txt
diff --git a/transcriptome.txt b/transcriptome.txt
index fe7c565..a4a265a 100644
--- a/transcriptome.txt
+++ b/transcriptome.txt
@@ -1,2 +1,6 @@
 Step 1: Map reads with tophat
 Step 2: Assemble transcripts with cufflinks
+Step 3-4: Final transcriptome assembly with cuffmerge
+Step 5: Compute differential expression with cuffdiff
+Step 6-18: Plot expression data with cummerbund
+Next steps: Back up our resultste the lack of humidity
+An ill-considered change
```


We could also use `git show` which shows us what changes we made at an older commit as well as the commit message, rather than the _differences_ between a commit and our working directory that we see by using `git diff`.

```
$ git show HEAD~2 transcriptome.txt
commit cfe53067828d2e7232503e4dfec43d9ac20e6cfb
Author: William Allen <wallen@tacc.utexas.edu>
Date:   Fri Jul 13 10:59:46 2018 -0500

    Added step 2 to transcriptome analysis

diff --git a/transcriptome.txt b/transcriptome.txt
index 0495f06..fe7c565 100644
--- a/transcriptome.txt
+++ b/transcriptome.txt
@@ -1 +1,2 @@
 Step 1: Map reads with tophat
+Step 2: Assemble transcripts with cufflinks
```

In this way,
we can build up a chain of commits.
The most recent end of the chain is referred to as `HEAD`;
we can refer to previous commits using the `~` notation,
so `HEAD~1`
means "the previous commit",
while `HEAD~555` goes back 555 commits from where we are now.

We can also refer to commits using
those long strings of digits and letters
that `git log` displays.
These are unique IDs for the changes,
and "unique" really does mean unique:
every change to any set of files on any computer
has a unique 40-character identifier.
Our first commit was given the ID
`cfe53067828d2e7232503e4dfec43d9ac20e6cfb`,
so let's try this:

```
$ git diff cfe53067828d2e7232503e4dfec43d9ac20e6cfb transcriptome.txt
diff --git a/transcriptome.txt b/transcriptome.txt
index fe7c565..a4a265a 100644
--- a/transcriptome.txt
+++ b/transcriptome.txt
@@ -1,2 +1,6 @@
 Step 1: Map reads with tophat
 Step 2: Assemble transcripts with cufflinks
+Step 3-4: Final transcriptome assembly with cuffmerge
+Step 5: Compute differential expression with cuffdiff
+Step 6-18: Plot expression data with cummerbund
+Next steps: Back up our results
```

That's the right answer,
but typing out random 40-character strings is annoying,
so Git lets us use just the first few characters:

```
$ git diff cfe5306 transcriptome.txt
diff --git a/transcriptome.txt b/transcriptome.txt
index fe7c565..a4a265a 100644
--- a/transcriptome.txt
+++ b/transcriptome.txt
@@ -1,2 +1,6 @@
 Step 1: Map reads with tophat
 Step 2: Assemble transcripts with cufflinks
+Step 3-4: Final transcriptome assembly with cuffmerge
+Step 5: Compute differential expression with cuffdiff
+Step 6-18: Plot expression data with cummerbund
+Next steps: Back up our results
```

All right! So
we can save changes to files and see what we've changed—now how
can we restore older versions of things?
Let's suppose we accidentally overwrite our file:

```
$ echo "" > transcriptome.txt
$ cat transcriptome.txt
```

`git status` now tells us that the file has been changed,
but those changes haven't been staged:

```
$ git status
On branch master
Changes not staged for commit:
  (use "git add <file>..." to update what will be committed)
  (use "git checkout -- <file>..." to discard changes in working directory)

	modified:   transcriptome.txt

no changes added to commit (use "git add" and/or "git commit -a")
```

We can put things back the way they were
by using `git checkout`:

```
$ git checkout HEAD transcriptome.txt
$ cat transcriptome.txt
Step 1: Map reads with tophat
Step 2: Assemble transcripts with cufflinks
Step 3-4: Final transcriptome assembly with cuffmerge
Step 5: Compute differential expression with cuffdiff
Step 6-18: Plot expression data with cummerbund
```

As you might guess from its name,
`git checkout` checks out (i.e., restores) an old version of a file.
In this case,
we're telling Git that we want to recover the version of the file recorded in `HEAD`,
which is the last saved commit.
If we want to go back even further,
we can use a commit identifier instead:

```
$ git checkout cfe5306 transcriptome.txt
$ cat transcriptome.txt
Step 1: Map reads with tophat
Step 2: Assemble transcripts with cufflinks
```

Again, we can put things back the way they were
by using `git checkout`:

```
$ git checkout HEAD transcriptome.txt
$ cat transcriptome.txt
Step 1: Map reads with tophat
Step 2: Assemble transcripts with cufflinks
Step 3-4: Final transcriptome assembly with cuffmerge
Step 5: Compute differential expression with cuffdiff
Step 6-18: Plot expression data with cummerbund
```

It looks like we recovered everything except for the very last change ("Next steps...") because we never added and committed that entry.
It's important to remember that
we must use the commit number that identifies the state of the repository
*before* the change we're trying to undo.
A common mistake is to use the number of
the commit in which we made the change we're trying to get rid of.
In the example below, we want to retrieve the state from before the most
recent commit (`HEAD~1`), which is commit `cfe5306`:

![Git Checkout](./fig/git-checkout.svg)

So, to put it all together,
here's how Git works in cartoon form:

![https://figshare.com/articles/How_Git_works_a_cartoon/1328266](./fig/git_staging.svg)


The fact that files can be reverted one by one
tends to change the way people organize their work.
If everything is in one large document,
it's hard (but not impossible) to undo changes to the introduction
without also undoing changes made later to the conclusion.
If the introduction and conclusion are stored in separate files,
on the other hand,
moving backward and forward in time becomes much easier.





### Exercise

#### Recovering Older Versions of a File

Jennifer has made changes to the Python script that she has been working on for weeks, and the
modifications she made this morning "broke" the script and it no longer runs. She has spent
~ 1hr trying to fix it, with no luck...

Luckily, she has been keeping track of her project's versions using Git! Which commands below will
let her recover the last committed version of her Python script called
`data_cruncher.py`?

1. `$ git checkout HEAD`
2. `$ git checkout HEAD data_cruncher.py`
3. `$ git checkout HEAD~1 data_cruncher.py`
4. `$ git checkout <unique ID of last commit> data_cruncher.py`
5. Both 2 and 4




### Summarize Histories

Exploring history is an important part of git, often it is a challenge to find
the right commit ID, especially if the commit is from several months ago.

Imagine the `my_first_repo` project has more than 50 files.
You would like to find a commit with specific text in `transcriptome.txt`.
When you type `git log`, a very long list appeared,
How can you narrow down the search?

Recall that the `git diff` command allow us to explore one specific file,
e.g. `git diff transcriptome.txt`. We can apply a similar idea here.

```
$ git log transcriptome.txt
```

Unfortunately, some of these commit messages may be very ambiguous e.g. `update files`.
How can you search through these files?

Both `git diff` and `git log` are very useful and they summarize a different part of the history for you.
Is it possible to combine both? Let's try the following:

```
$ git log --patch transcriptome.txt
```

You should get a long list of output, and you should be able to see both commit messages and the difference between each commit.


### Exercise

What does the following command do?

```
$ git log --patch HEAD~3 *.txt
```


Previous: [Tracking Changes](reproducibility_git_04.md) | Next: [Link a Local Repository to GitHub](reproducibility_git_06.md) | Top: [Course Overview](../../index.md)

Commit message:

micro changes to reproducibility with git page 5

docs/reproducibility_git/reproducibility_git_05.md, after:

## Exploring History

As we saw in the previous lesson, we can refer to commits by their
identifiers.  You can refer to the _most recent commit_ of the working
directory by using the identifier `HEAD`.

We've been adding one or two lines at a time to `transcriptome.txt`, so it's easy to track our
progress by looking, so let's do that using our `HEAD`s.  Before we start,
let's make a change to `transcriptome.txt`.

```
$ echo "Next steps: Back up our results" >> transcriptome.txt
$ cat transcriptome.txt
Step 1: Map reads with tophat
Step 2: Assemble transcripts with cufflinks
Step 3-4: Final transcriptome assembly with cuffmerge
Step 5: Compute differential expression with cuffdiff
Step 6-18: Plot expression data with cummerbund
Next steps: Back up our results
```

Now, let's see what we get.

```
$ git diff HEAD transcriptome.txt
diff --git a/transcriptome.txt b/transcriptome.txt
index c876e8d..a4a265a 100644
--- a/transcriptome.txt
+++ b/transcriptome.txt
@@ -3,3 +3,4 @@ Step 2: Assemble transcripts with cufflinks
 Step 3-4: Final transcriptome assembly with cuffmerge
 Step 5: Compute differential expression with cuffdiff
 Step 6-18: Plot expression data with cummerbund
+Next steps: Back up our results
```

Which is the same as what you would get if you leave out `HEAD` (try it).  The
real benefit in all this is when you can refer to previous commits.  We do
that by adding `~1` to refer to the commit one before `HEAD`.

```
$ git diff HEAD~1 transcriptome.txt
diff --git a/transcriptome.txt b/transcriptome.txt
index 61f7805..a4a265a 100644
--- a/transcriptome.txt
+++ b/transcriptome.txt
@@ -1,3 +1,6 @@
 Step 1: Map reads with tophat
 Step 2: Assemble transcripts with cufflinks
 Step 3-4: Final transcriptome assembly with cuffmerge
+Step 5: Compute differential expression with cuffdiff
+Step 6-18: Plot expression data with cummerbund
+Next steps: Back up our results
```

If we want to see the differences between older commits we can use `git diff`
again, but with the notation `HEAD~1`, `HEAD~2`, and so on, to refer to them:

```
$ git diff HEAD~2 transcriptome.txt
diff --git a/transcriptome.txt b/transcriptome.txt
index fe7c565..a4a265a 100644
--- a/transcriptome.txt
+++ b/transcriptome.txt
@@ -1,2 +1,6 @@
 Step 1: Map reads with tophat
 Step 2: Assemble transcripts with cufflinks
+Step 3-4: Final transcriptome assembly with cuffmerge
+Step 5: Compute differential expression with cuffdiff
+Step 6-18: Plot expression data with cummerbund
+Next steps: Back up our resultste the lack of humidity
+An ill-considered change
```

### More Detailed Histories

We could also use `git show` which shows us what changes we made at an older commit as well as the commit message, rather than the _differences_ between a commit and our working directory that we see by using `git diff`.

```
$ git show HEAD~2 transcriptome.txt
commit cfe53067828d2e7232503e4dfec43d9ac20e6cfb
Author: William Allen <wallen@tacc.utexas.edu>
Date:   Fri Jul 13 10:59:46 2018 -0500

    Added step 2 to transcriptome analysis

diff --git a/transcriptome.txt b/transcriptome.txt
index 0495f06..fe7c565 100644
--- a/transcriptome.txt
+++ b/transcriptome.txt
@@ -1 +1,2 @@
 Step 1: Map reads with tophat
+Step 2: Assemble transcripts with cufflinks
```

In this way,
we can build up a chain of commits.
The most recent end of the chain is referred to as `HEAD`;
we can refer to previous commits using the `~` notation,
so `HEAD~1`
means "the previous commit",
while `HEAD~100` goes back 100 commits from where we are now.

### Look at Changes Given Commit ID

We can also refer to commits using
those long strings of digits and letters
that `git log` displays.
These are unique IDs for the changes,
and "unique" really does mean unique:
every change to any set of files on any computer
has a unique 40-character identifier.
Our first commit was given the ID
`cfe53067828d2e7232503e4dfec43d9ac20e6cfb`,
so let's try this:

```
$ git diff cfe53067828d2e7232503e4dfec43d9ac20e6cfb transcriptome.txt
diff --git a/transcriptome.txt b/transcriptome.txt
index fe7c565..a4a265a 100644
--- a/transcriptome.txt
+++ b/transcriptome.txt
@@ -1,2 +1,6 @@
 Step 1: Map reads with tophat
 Step 2: Assemble transcripts with cufflinks
+Step 3-4: Final transcriptome assembly with cuffmerge
+Step 5: Compute differential expression with cuffdiff
+Step 6-18: Plot expression data with cummerbund
+Next steps: Back up our results
```

That's the right answer,
but typing out random 40-character strings is annoying,
so Git lets us use just the first few characters:

```
$ git diff cfe5306 transcriptome.txt
diff --git a/transcriptome.txt b/transcriptome.txt
index fe7c565..a4a265a 100644
--- a/transcriptome.txt
+++ b/transcriptome.txt
@@ -1,2 +1,6 @@
 Step 1: Map reads with tophat
 Step 2: Assemble transcripts with cufflinks
+Step 3-4: Final transcriptome assembly with cuffmerge
+Step 5: Compute differential expression with cuffdiff
+Step 6-18: Plot expression data with cummerbund
+Next steps: Back up our results
```

### Restoring Old Versions of Files

We can save changes to files and see what we've changed—now how
can we restore older versions of things?
Let's suppose we accidentally overwrite our file:

```
$ echo "" > transcriptome.txt
$ cat transcriptome.txt
```

`git status` now tells us that the file has been changed,
but those changes haven't been staged:

```
$ git status
On branch master
Changes not staged for commit:
  (use "git add <file>..." to update what will be committed)
  (use "git checkout -- <file>..." to discard changes in working directory)

	modified:   transcriptome.txt

no changes added to commit (use "git add" and/or "git commit -a")
```

We can put things back the way they were
by using `git checkout`:

```
$ git checkout HEAD transcriptome.txt
$ cat transcriptome.txt
Step 1: Map reads with tophat
Step 2: Assemble transcripts with cufflinks
Step 3-4: Final transcriptome assembly with cuffmerge
Step 5: Compute differential expression with cuffdiff
Step 6-18: Plot expression data with cummerbund
```

As you might guess from its name,
`git checkout` checks out (i.e., restores) an old version of a file.
In this case,
we're telling Git that we want to recover the version of the file recorded in `HEAD`,
which is the last saved commit.
If we want to go back even further,
we can use a commit identifier instead:

```
$ git checkout cfe5306 transcriptome.txt
$ cat transcriptome.txt
Step 1: Map reads with tophat
Step 2: Assemble transcripts with cufflinks
```

Again, we can put things back the way they were
by using `git checkout`:

```
$ git checkout HEAD transcriptome.txt
$ cat transcriptome.txt
Step 1: Map reads with tophat
Step 2: Assemble transcripts with cufflinks
Step 3-4: Final transcriptome assembly with cuffmerge
Step 5: Compute differential expression with cuffdiff
Step 6-18: Plot expression data with cummerbund
```

It looks like we recovered everything except for the very last change ("Next steps...") because we never added and committed that entry.
It's important to remember that
we must use the commit number that identifies the state of the repository
*before* the change we're trying to undo.
A common mistake is to use the number of
the commit in which we made the change we're trying to get rid of.
In the example below, we want to retrieve the state from before the most
recent commit (`HEAD~1`), which is commit `cfe5306`:

![Git Checkout](./fig/git-checkout.svg)


The fact that files can be reverted one by one
tends to change the way people organize their work.
If everything is in one large document,
it's hard (but not impossible) to undo changes to the introduction
without also undoing changes made later to the conclusion.
If the introduction and conclusion are stored in separate files,
on the other hand,
moving backward and forward in time becomes much easier.





### Exercise

#### Recovering Older Versions of a File

Jennifer has made changes to the Python script that she has been working on for weeks, and the
modifications she made this morning "broke" the script and it no longer runs. She has spent
~ 1hr trying to fix it, with no luck...

Luckily, she has been keeping track of her project's versions using Git. Which commands below will
let her recover the last committed version of her Python script called
`data_cruncher.py`?

1. `$ git checkout HEAD`
2. `$ git checkout HEAD data_cruncher.py`
3. `$ git checkout HEAD~1 data_cruncher.py`
4. `$ git checkout <unique ID of last commit> data_cruncher.py`


### Summarize Histories

Exploring history is an important part of git, often it is a challenge to find
the right commit ID, especially if the commit is from several months ago.

Imagine the `my_first_repo` project has more than 50 files.
You would like to find a commit with specific text in `transcriptome.txt`.
When you type `git log`, a very long list appeared,
How can you narrow down the search?

Recall that the `git diff` command allow us to explore one specific file,
e.g. `git diff transcriptome.txt`. We can apply a similar idea here.

```
$ git log transcriptome.txt
```

Unfortunately, some of these commit messages may be very ambiguous e.g. `update files`.
How can you search through these files?

Both `git diff` and `git log` are very useful and they summarize a different part of the history for you.
Is it possible to combine both? Let's try the following:

```
$ git log --patch transcriptome.txt
```

You should get a long list of output, and you should be able to see both commit messages and the difference between each commit.


### Exercise

1. What does the following command do? `$ git log --patch HEAD~3 *.txt`
2. Create a new Git repo in a new folder. Create or copy in two files with text in them (any text is fine). Separately, add and commit those files to the new repo.


Previous: [Tracking Changes](reproducibility_git_04.md) | Next: [Link a Local Repository to GitHub](reproducibility_git_06.md) | Top: [Course Overview](../../index.md)
