# VARIABLES
As we've already scene, variables store important shell environment information as well as information we wish to repeat or reuse.
## Types of VARIABLES
Variables in `bash` are most often:
+ untyped [DEFAULT] : character string or integer
  * a=5
  * a="apple"
+ integer: numeric integer
  * i=5
+ string: groups of characters
  * a="apple"
+ arrays: indexed collections sharing a common name
  * a=(apple pear plum)
  * a[1]="apple", a[2]="pear", a[3]="plum"

There are a small number of other variable types, but there are NO FLOATING POINT variables.
+ a=5.27 defaults to the character string `5<period>27`

## How to access the value of a variable
The value of a variable can be accessed by preceding it with a $.
```
prompt> a=apple
prompt> echo $a
apple
```

## Expanded variable access <br> (a.k.a. parameter substitution)
Surrounding a `variable` with `${}` indicates you want to treat it as a `parameter` and access more information about the variable.

Three common parameter substitutions are:
+ `${parameter}` : the value of the parameter.
  ```
  prompt> a="apple"
  prompt> echo ${a} $a
  apple apple
  ```
+ `${parameter?}` : assess whether the variable is set.
  ```
  prompt> echo ${fruit?}
  -bash: fruit: parameter null or not set
  prompt> a=apple
  prompt> b=""
  prompt> echo ${a?}
  apple
  prompt> echo ${b?}

  ```
+ `${#parameter}` : length of parameter.
  ```
  prompt> echo ${#a} ${a}
  5 apple
  ```
+ `${parameter:-default}` : value of parameter or if parameter not set, then `default`
  ```
  prompt> echo ${lime}

  prompt> echo ${lime:-"citrus"}
  citrus
  prompt> echo ${lime}

  ```
+ `${parameter:=default}` : value of parameter or if parameter not set, then parameter set to `default`
  ```
  prompt> echo ${lime}

  prompt> echo ${lime:-"citrus"}
  citrus
  prompt> echo ${lime}

  ```

### Factors affecting parameter substitution
We'll come back to more parameter substitutions shortly, button let's explore other factors that impact use of variables.

#### Quotation and escaping
As we've seen, $variable and ${variable} correspond to `the value of variable` , but how we access that value is important.
#### double quotes: treat items inside as single element
```
prompt> a="1 2  3   4    END"
prompt> echo $a
1 2 3 4 END
prompt> echo ${a}
1 2 3 4 END
prompt> echo "${a}"
1 2  3   4    END
```
**_QUESTION: Why did only `"${a}"` show the true value?_**

#### single quotes: treat items inside as single element and do not evaluate substitutions
```
prompt> echo '${a}'
${a}
prompt> echo '${a}' = $a
${a} = 1 2 3 4 END
```
#### blackslash(\\) (aka escaping): do not evaluate substitutions or other special behaviour.
```
prompt> echo '${a}' = \$a
${a} = $a
```

### Exercise:
Let's practice what you've learned with some changes:
```
prompt> cp first_script.sh second_script.sh
prompt> vi second_script.sh

#!/bin/bash
# The first line is a "shebang". This line is a comment.
# Print a message
STRING1='TACC       Summer   Institute'
STRING2="is    great!"
YEAR=2018
echo "${STRING1}${YEAR}" ${STRING2} ${#YEAR}
```
type `<ESC>:wq` to write the changes then quit `vi`.

#### QUESTION: Do we need to `chmod +x` ?
No. But why not?

#### execute
```
prompt> ./second_script.sh
TACC       Summer   Institute2018 is great! 4
```
#### DISCUSS: Why did we observe that pattern of spacing?

<br>

Prev [BASH scripting](bash_01_01.md) | Next [Arithmetic](bash_01_03.md) | UP : [BASH scripting](bash_scripting.md) | Top : [Course Overview](../../index.md)
&copy; 2017 Texas Advanced Computing Center
