# What is bash scripting?
As you seen already, `BASH` is a "shell programming environment": a way to tell linux how to run commands.
Shell scripts are at the heart of a shell as a programming environment. They allow us to take the commands we repeat frequently and save them in files so that we can re-run all those operations again later by typing a single command.
## So how do I make a bash script?
+ identify commands you'd like to repeat
+ edit a text and insert these commands
  * be sure and add "comments" so you know why you inserted those commands and how to use them
+ save the file
+ tell bash that you want to "execute" the script (ie. run all those commands)

### collect your commands
if I want to write information to the screen, I could use `echo` :
```
prompt> msg="TACC Summer Institute"
prompt> echo $msg
TACC Summer Institute
```
In order to repeat that over and over, let's create a script using the text editor `vi` (that we learned earlier):
```
prompt> vi first_script.sh
```
let's enter the above command as well as some "comments". Lines starting with "#" are not executed, so we can use them to remind us what or why we're doing something.
```
# Print a message
STRING="TACC Summer Institute"
echo $STRING
```
type `<ESC>:wq` to write the changes then quit `vi`.
for now don't worry about the variable named "STRING". A `string` is a type of variable that holds text data.

### "execute" (run) the script
How do we execute a script?
Let's try typing file name:
```
prompt> first_script.sh
-bash: first_script.sh: command not found
prompt> ./first_script.sh
-bash: ./first_script.sh: Permission denied
```
OOPS!
So those didn't work because `BASH` doesn't implicitly know when to execute commands. Try:
```
prompt> bash ./first_script.sh
TACC Summer Institute
```
### shebang "#!"
In order to not have to type `bash` each time, let's edit the file again and insert a `#!`(aka shebang) to let bash know what to do (ie. use `/bin/bash` to run the script)
```
prompt> nano first_script.sh

#!/bin/bash
# The first line is a "shebang". This line is a comment.
# Print a message
STRING1="TACC Summer Institute"
STRING2="is great!"
echo $STRING1 $STRING2
```
now `bash` knows that `/bin/bash` should execute the commands, but we also need to tell `bash` it's allowed to run that script.
```
prompt> chmod +x first_script.sh
```
( _**recall that `chmod` changes the permissions on a file and `+x` adds eXecution permission**_ )

```
prompt> ./first_script.sh
TACC Summer Institute is great!
```
We can now repeat any given series of commands exactly, allowing for both ease of use and improved reliability.

### QUESTION: Why does scripting improve reliability?

<br>

Prev :arrow_backward: [BASH scripting](bash_scripting.md) | Next :arrow_forward: [VARIABLES](bash_01_02.md) | UP :arrow_up: : [BASH scripting](bash_scripting.md) | Top :arrow_double_up: : [Course Overview](docs/index.md)
